AYUSHMAN BHARAT: Comprehensive Primary Health Care through Health and Wellness Centers

Introduction

The National Health Mission (NHM), the country’s flagship health systems strengthening programme,
particularly for primary and secondary health care envisages “attainment of universal access to equitable,
affordable and quality health care which is accountable and responsive to the needs of people”. Investments
during the life of the NHM in its earlier phases were targeted to strengthen Reproductive and Child Health
(RCH) services and contain the increasing burden of communicable diseases such as Tuberculosis, HIV/
AIDS and vector borne diseases. While such a focus on selective primary health care interventions, enabled
improvements in key indicators related to RCH and select communicable diseases, the range of services
delivered at the primary care level did not consider increasing disease burden and rising costs of care on
account of chronic diseases.
Studies show that 11.5% households in rural areas and about only 4% in urban areas, reported seeking any
form of OPD care - at or below the CHC level (except for childbirth) primary care facilities, indicating low
utilization of the public health systems for other common ailments1
. National Sample Survey estimates for
the period-2004 to 2014 show a 10% increase in households facing catastrophic healthcare expenditures.
This could be attributed to the fact that private sector remains the major provider of health services in
the country and caters to over 75% and 62% of outpatient and in-patient care respectively. India is also
witnessing an epidemiological and demographic transition, where non-communicable diseases such as
cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, cancer, respiratory, and other chronic diseases, account for over 60% of
total mortality.2
There is global evidence that Primary Health Care is critical to improving health outcomes. It has an important
role in the primary and secondary prevention of several disease conditions, including non-communicable
diseases. The provision of Comprehensive Primary Health Care reduces morbidity and mortality at much
lower costs and significantly reduces the need for secondary and tertiary care. For primary health care to be
comprehensive, it needs to span preventive, promotive, curative, rehabilitative and palliative aspects of care.
Primary Health Care goes beyond first contact care, and is expected to mediate a two-way referral support
to higher-level facilities (from first level care provider through specialist care and back) and ensure follow up
support for individual and population health interventions.
In India, the need for and emphasis on strengthening Primary Health Care was firstly articulated in the Bhore
Committee Report 1946 and subsequently in the First and Second National Health Policy statements (1983 and 2002). India is also a signatory to the Alma Ata declaration for Health for All in 1978. The Twelfth Five
Year Plan Identified Universal Health Coverage as a key goal and based on the recommendations of the
High- Level Expert Group Report on UHC had called for 70% budgetary allocation to Primary Health Care in
pursuit of UHC for India.
The National Health Policy, 2017 recommended strengthening the delivery of Primary Health Care, through
establishment of “Health and Wellness Centres” as the platform to deliver Comprehensive Primary Health
Care and called for a commitment of two thirds of the health budget to primary health care.
In February 2018, the Government of India announced that 1,50,000 Health & Wellness Centres (HWCs)
would be created by transforming existing Sub Health Centres and Primary Health Centres to deliver
Comprehensive Primary Health Care and declared this as one of the two components of Ayushman Bharat.
This was the first step in the conversion of policy articulations to a budgetary commitment.
The Report of the Primary Health Care Task Force, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of
India while reiterating that primary health care is the only affordable and effective path for India to Universal
Health Coverage, also provided valuable insights into structure and processes that are required in health
systems to enable Comprehensive Primary Health Care (CPHC).
The delivery of CPHC through HWCs rests substantially on the institutional mechanisms, governance
structures, and systems created under the National Health Mission (NHM). NHM, as part of health system
reform in the country, in its nearly 12 years of implementation, has supported states to create several
platforms for delivery of community-based health systems, expanding Human Resources for Health and
infrastructure towards strengthening primary and secondary care. Though largely limited to a few conditions,
NHM created mechanisms for expanded coverage and reach, and developed systems for improved delivery
of medicines, diagnostics and improved reporting. About five years ago, these components were also
introduced in urban areas.
Thus, although the delivery of universal Comprehensive Primary Health Care, through HWCs builds on
existing systems, it will need change management and systems design at various levels, to realise its full
potential. The other component of Ayushman Bharat, namely the Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PMJAY)
aims to provide financial protection for secondary and tertiary care to about 40% of India’s households.
Its success and affordability rests substantially on the effectiveness of provision of Comprehensive Primary
Health Care through HWCs. Together, the two components of Ayushman Bharat will enable the realization
of the aspiration for Universal Health Coverage. 

About the Guidelines 

These guidelines were developed after consultation with policy makers and practitioners at national and
state level and with technical experts. It also draws on implementation experiences of government, NGO and
private sector in the delivery of Primary Health Care. These guidelines are intended to serve as a framework
for operationalizing the multiple components required for the delivery of Comprehensive Primary Health
Care services through the Health & Wellness Centres. These guidelines are expected to support programme
managers at state and district levels in rolling out Comprehensive Primary Health Care. They provide an
overview of the systems requirements and strategies for change management to deliver CPHC.
The use of these guidelines would enable the states to put in place the necessary design elements and subsystems required for Health and Wellness Centres to be created and deliver the health services expected of
them. However, states have the flexibility to make necessary modifications based on their specific needs and
capacities. The implementation of Comprehensive Primary Health Care would require substantial change
management in processes for planning, service delivery, monitoring and financing and will require the
active participation of several stakeholders including civil society, NGOs, academic and research agencies, development partners, the private sector and, most importantly, the community. Operationalizing HWCs will
be incremental in nature with contextual variations in models and processes evolving in different states.
These guidelines do not cover grounds included in several other guidelines already issued but highlight
areas in which transformation and change management is needed, besides clarifying key concepts related
to Comprehensive Primary Health Care and Health and Wellness Centres.
These guidelines are envisaged to be reviewed periodically and revised based on implementation
lessons from the field so that they continue to provide meaningful and updated guidance to programme
implementers and inform policy adaptation and modification.

1 Key Indicators of Social Consumption in India on Health, National Sample Survey 71st Round, 2014, Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation, Government of India
2 WHO. Non Communicable Diseases; Country Profile for India; 2014